# Genomic epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 transmission lineages in Ecuador
Identification and analysis of the early transmission dynamics, importations and local circulation of SARS-CoV-2 in Ecuador inferred from genomic data.

Bernardo Gutierrez<sup>1,2</sup>, Sully Márquez<sup>3</sup>, Belén Prado-Vivar<sup>3</sup>, Mónica Becerra-Wong<sup>3</sup>, Juan José Guadalupe<sup>4</sup>, Darlan da Silva Candido<sup>1</sup>, Juan Carlos Fernandez-Cadena<sup>5</sup>, Gabriel Morey-Leon<sup>6</sup>, Rubén Armas-Gonzalez<sup>7</sup>, Derly Madeleiny Andrade-Molina<sup>5</sup>, Alfredo Bruno<sup>8,9</sup>, Domenica de Mora<sup>8</sup>, Maritza Olmedo<sup>8</sup>, Denisse Portugal<sup>8</sup>, Manuel Gonzalez<sup>8</sup>, Alberto Orlando<sup>8</sup>, Jan Felix Drexler<sup>10</sup>, Andres Moreira<sup>10</sup>, Anna-Lena Sander<sup>10</sup>, Nina Krause<sup>10</sup>, Leandro Patiño<sup>8</sup>, Andres Carrasco<sup>8</sup>, Orson Mestanza<sup>8</sup>, Jeannette Zurita<sup>11,12</sup>, Gabriela Sevillano<sup>12</sup>, Louis du Plessis<sup>1</sup>, John T. McCrone<sup>13</sup>, Josefina Coloma<sup>14</sup>, Gabriel Trueba<sup>3</sup>, Veronica Barragan<sup>3</sup>, Patricio Rojas-Silva<sup>3</sup>, Michelle Grunauer<sup>15</sup>, Moritz U.G. Kraemer<sup>1</sup>, Nuno R. Faria<sup>1,16</sup>, Marina Escalera-Zamudio<sup>1</sup>, Oliver G. Pybus<sup>1,17*</sup>, Paul Cárdenas<sup>3*</sup>

<sup><sup>1</sup>Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
<sup>2</sup>Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y Ambientales, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
<sup>3</sup>Instituto de Microbiología, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
<sup>4</sup>Laboratorio de Biotecnología Vegetal, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
<sup>5</sup>Omics Sciences Laboratory, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Universidad de Especialidades Espíritu Santo, Samborondón, Ecuador.
<sup>6</sup>Faculty of Medical Sciences, Universidad de Guayaquil, Guayaquil, Ecuador.
<sup>7</sup>Faculty of Sciences, Escuela Superior Politécnica del Litoral, Guayaquil, Ecuador.
<sup>8</sup>Instituto Nacional de Investigación en Salud Pública, Guayaquil, Ecuador.
<sup>9</sup>Universidad Agraria del Ecuador.
<sup>10</sup>Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
<sup>11</sup>Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador.
<sup>12</sup>Unidad de Investigaciones en Biomedicina, Zurita & Zurita Laboratorios, Quito, Ecuador.
<sup>13</sup>Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
<sup>14</sup>School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
<sup>15</sup>Escuela de Medicina, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
<sup>16</sup>MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, J-IDEA, Imperial College London, London, UK.
<sup>17</sup>Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College London, London, UK.</sup>

## Repository usage and structure

The structure of this repository is shown below. It highlights the location of individual R scripts used to generate plots or analyses and input data files. Input and output data from the phylogenetic analyses, plot and supplementary files and supplementary files are not listed in their entirety.

```
SARS-CoV-2_Genomic_lineages_Ecuador/
├── Data
│   ├── MSP_epi_data
│   └── genetic_data
│       ├── GISAID_complete_highcoverage_20210107
│       └── metadata
├── Analyses
│   └── phylogenetics
│       ├── ML_SARS2_EC
│       └── BEAST_SARS2_EC
├── Plots
│   └── SARS2_phylo_plots.R
└── README.md
```

## Input data

All input data that we are able to share publicly are stored in the [`Data`](Data/) directory. Epidemiological data was collected and made public by the National Service of Risk Management and Emergencies of Ecuador (Servicio Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos y Emergencias del Ecuador, SNGRE), the Ministry of Public Health of Ecuador (Ministerio de Salud Pública del Ecuador, MSP), and the Civil Registry of Ecuador (Registro Civil del Ecuador). The data sets used in this study have been collated by the Ecuacovid repository (https://github.com/andrab/ecuacovid). The following sub-directories are included:

- **Ministry of Health epidemiological data** contained in the [`MSP_epi_data`](Data/MSP_epi_data/) directory.

- **SARS-CoV-2 viral genome sequence data** generated by the Microbiology Institute at Universidad San Francisco de Quito, the Omics Science Laboratory at Universidad de Especialidades Espíritu Santo, the Instituto Nacional de Investigación en Salud Pública on-site and in collaboration with Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, and the Unit for Biomedical Investigations at Zurita & Zurita Laboratorios contained in the [`genetic_data`](Data/genetic_data) directory. This directory also includes alignments with sequences downloaded from the GISAID repository and subsampled for our analyses.

## Analyses

The [`Analyses`](Analyses/) directory contains supplementary files and the [`phylogenetics`](Analyses/phylogenetics) sub-directory which includes:

- **Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic analyses:** The [`ML_SARS2_EC`](Analyses/phylogenetics/ML_SARS2_EC/) directory contains outputs from various Maximum Likelihood analyses performed in IQtree 2.1.1. Input data can be found in the [`genetic_data/GISAID_complete_highcoverage_20210107`](Data/genetic_data/GISAID_complete_highcoverage_20210107) directory.
- **Bayesian phylogenetic analyses:** The [`BEAST_SARS2_EC`](Analyses/phylogenetics/BEAST_SARS2_EC/) directory contains outputs from various molecular clock and discrete trait analyses (DTA) performed in BEAST v10.1.4 and BEAST v10.1.5. Input data can be found in the [`genetic_data/GISAID_complete_highcoverage_20210107`](Data/genetic_data/GISAID_complete_highcoverage_20210107) and [`genetic_data/metadata`](Data/genetic_data/metadata) directories.
